---
title: Deep work
description: Deep Work
author: Carmen Kung
date: 2021-12-25
tags: post
image: /assets/blog/deep-work_cover.jpeg
imageAlt: this is an image
---
The book "Deep work: Rules for focused success in a distracted world" has introduced ideas and frameworks to me that helped me understand a lot of the struggles I face in my professional life.

### What is Deep Work?

It is work that is done in a distraction free state that pushes the mind to its limits. Deep work is required to create true value and cannot be replaced by extended periods of Shallow Work. This also creates unique value that differentiates the individual and cannot be replicated by another person. This is how knowledge work is produced.

### Shallow Work?

These are activities that are significantly less cognitively demanding, usually logistical or operational tasks that can be performed while in a distracted state of mind. This is work that is easily replicable by another individual.

**Main Ideas**

1. Long uninterrupted periods of "Deep Work" is what will allow you to produce your best work. This is what has produced work that has driven the direction that industries take.
2. The ability to enter the state of depth required is a skill that can be trained
3. The modern world is so full of distractions that the ability to enter this state is now a scarce resource and the reader can stand out by learning this skill
4. Being busy doesn't mean you are being productive. Falling back into the "Industrial indicator of productivity" by doing lots of things in a visible manner is easy but brings little to no value to your work.
5. Meaning doesn't have to come from finding your ideal job that you are "passionate" about but from treating work like craft: being skillful is something that can be applied to any vocation. Meaning is generated when you treat your work with respect and care.

## How can I apply this in my professional life?

One of the biggest problems I face in my role as a Product Manager is that I am meant to be the glue that holds different parts of the business together. My value is generated when I enable others to perform and there is no clear measure of my productivity and value.

Hence I, like many other people in the world, fall back on the Industrial Indicator of productivity: Busyness.

> Busyness as Proxy for Productivity: In the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator of productivity: doing lots of stuff in a visible manner.

I shared in another [post](https://www.carmenkung.com/6-months-as-a-product-manager/) that one of the first struggles I faced was the burden of strategic decisions I lack sufficient experience to make. This doesn't appear to be a problem unique to me. From reading the experiences of other PMs on reddit, a very reliable source of tech gossip, associate or even mid-level PMs are often required to provide strategic direction in the absence of context from the business.

> How can we then create true value with our work if we lack the experience to guide our team down the right path?

Perhaps the answer is simple: setting aside long periods of uninterrupted "Deep Work" time each day for strategic thinking. Making good decisions required a lot of information and time to process them. I won't get there by worrying in the 15mins between meetings. Long uninterrupted periods of time (>4hours) Newport suggests but does this way of working make sense as a PM?

## Is there room for Deep Working in Product Management?

Or are Product Managers meant to be available at all times to facilitate communication? Are we doomed to spend inordinate amounts of doing lots of things in a visible manner and not actually providing value?

Incorporating more "Deep Work" might help us better drive conversations "upwards" and ask the right questions. From personal experience, trying to gain clarity by going "what's the overall objective?" did not get me very far. I need to get better at understanding what questions will provide me with the strategic clarity I need.

We can either choose to wait and learn from a multitude of mistakes and hope to some day attain this skill or work actively at it by taking time to think. Make sense of the full breadth of information available to me.

Take time to absorb and understand data can help identify the right questions to ask, the right information to relay and the next best steps to take. Looking below the surface and generating strategic ideas take more than 30mins before a meeting.

Newport recommends a minimum of 4 hours to get "into the flow" which seems unattainable at the moment. But if CEOs can take weeks off work to think, we can afford to set aside 4 hours every so often.

## Deriving meaning from work

Another point that Newport makes in his book that is deviates slightly from the concept of "Deep Work" is that true value and meaning can be created from any vocation if you treat it as a craft. He disagrees with the popular 21st century notion that we should "follow our passion".

Below is a quote from the book:

> “In our current culture, we place a lot of emphasis on job description. Our obsession with the advice to “follow your passion” (the subject of my last book), for example, is motivated by the (flawed) idea that what matters most for your career satisfaction is the specifics of the job you choose. In this way of thinking, there are some rarified jobs that can be a source of satisfaction—perhaps working in a nonprofit or starting a software company—while all others are soulless and bland. The philosophy of Dreyfus and Kelly frees us from such traps. The craftsmen they cite don’t have rarified jobs. Throughout most of human history, to be a blacksmith or a wheelwright wasn’t glamorous. But this doesn’t matter, as the specifics of the work are irrelevant. The meaning uncovered by such efforts is due to the skill and appreciation inherent in craftsmanship—not the outcomes of their work.”

This strikes a cord with me as I am no stranger to depression, often from feeling that there is no meaning in my professional pursuit.

**In Logotherapy, a psychological theory that is based on the premise that the primary motivational force of an individual is to find meaning in life.**

You might be familiar with this if have read the famous book "Man's Search for Meaning" by  Viktor Frankl, a neurologist, psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor.

I am no expert on Psychology but this theory definitely introduces certain concepts that I think can be applied to my professional life. I love my role and when I get things right, I feel a surge of something that I don't get from anything else in my life. But ability to be find my professional achievements fulfilling can be dampened by the entity or company I work in.

Frankl mentions that individuals may be depressed when facing tension between who they actually are in relation to what they should be and calls this the "gaping abyss".

Having to follow through and be accountable for something I don't believe in has been one of the most trying aspects of my professional life. From the perspective of Logotherapy, I do not see any meaning in such pursuits and my inability to change that could be causing feelings of inadequacy stemming from undertaking a task beyond my ability: to create value from an apparently purposeless pursuit. These bouts of what I always think of as "work depression" may stem from an awareness of how far off my work is from what I believe it should be.

Back to Newport's theory about how meaning can be generated from respecting and appreciating your vocation and applying yourself to your role as a craftsman would. I wonder if this might be a way to suffer from "work depression" less frequently and attain more overall meaning in my life.